Good day, brothers and sisters!
No doubt you’ve been enjoying
the music-video presentations
that have been prepared for this convention.
Now it’s time to enjoy the next one.
As you watch it, notice the joy that comes
from a life spent in Jehovah’s service.
Let us now stand and sing a song
that reflects the joy we find
when we preach and teach with zeal.
Please stand and sing song number 76,
entitled “How Does It Make You Feel?”
That’s song number 76.
Please be seated.
Jehovah’s people
are preaching the good news earth wide,
and we rejoice
to see many responding favorably.
What can we learn from the efforts
of our brothers around the world?
How can we help honesthearted ones
to make progress?
The following video features experiences
from six different regions.
Brother Mark Noumair, a helper
to the Teaching Committee, will be our host.
Let’s now join Brother Noumair and learn
“How Our Brothers
Are Experiencing Disciple-Making Joy.”
If you were asked to think of two men
in the first century
who were zealous disciple-makers,
who would come to your mind?
You may be thinking of Paul and Barnabas.
Together, they traveled extensively,
preaching the good news
and helping many
to learn the wonderful truth
about Jehovah.
This work brought joy
not only to them but others too.
Acts 15:3 states:
“So after being escorted
“partway by the congregation,
“these men continued on
“through both Phoenicia and Samaria,
“relating in detail the conversion
“of people of the nations
and bringing great joy to all the brothers.”
Their shared experiences
were a great source of joy
to the brotherhood.
They all felt encouraged
and united as one spiritual family.
So, too, today, we have many
like Paul and Barnabas,
who are actively working
to find honesthearted ones.
Let’s quickly review the numbers
and see what
our spiritual family’s united efforts
have accomplished
during the 2019 service year.
The good news was preached in 240 lands.
The average number of publishers
each month reached over 8.4 million!
More than two billion hours
were spent in the field.
Also, you’ll be pleased to know
that the number baptized
surpassed 300,000
for the first time in 20 years!
That’s, on average, 5,843 people
symbolizing their dedication
to Jehovah every weekend.
And there’s great potential
for millions more to embrace the truth.
On average, 9.6 million Bible studies
were conducted each month,
and almost 21 million attended the Memorial.
We praise Jehovah for this growth
and thank you for your share
in this great increase.
The Governing Body received
some beautiful experiences
and reports this past service year,
and they wanted to share
that joy with all of you now.
Would you like to hear
some of these reports
and meet some
of our hardworking brothers and sisters?
Well, then, let’s go!
We’ll meet publishers
from six regions of the earth
and hear in their own words the effect
that the disciple-making work
has on them.
Here’s a quick peek.
We’ll see some
of their unique challenges.
When it rains,
there is so much mud everywhere
that we need to remove our shoes
and hold them in our hands.
We’ll meet ones
who made personal sacrifices.
When I turned 60 and retired,
my wife and I decided
to serve where the need is greater.
This brother can see,
but he cannot walk,
and me, I can walk but cannot see.
We’ll see the impact
the truth can have on new ones.
It made me happy.
Yet, can I really dare believe that?
I was actually sort of in shock,
and it really put a spotlight
on who I really was.
What bad habits did some have at first?
What pressures did they face?
And how did they overcome them?
One day she asked her to choose
between family and Jehovah.
Hopefully that whets your appetite
for what’s to come.
Now, as we take you around the world,
enjoy the stories
of your brothers and sisters
and watch for clues
to what contributed to their joy.
Let’s begin with Africa.
It stretches from the Mediterranean
past the golden Sahara
through mountains and savannas
to the Cape of Good Hope.
This continent is known
for the enormous diversity
and richness of its wildlife.
Africa’s population,
about 1.3 billion people,
is growing faster
than any other part of the world.
More than 1,500 languages
are spoken here.
The first Christian from Africa,
the Ethiopian eunuch
mentioned in Acts chapter 8,
likely brought the good news back with him
to Ethiopia when he returned home.
Today, over 1.7 million publishers
are making disciples
throughout this vast continent.
Let’s visit our brothers and sisters
in Africa’s most populous country:
Nigeria.
More than 360,000 publishers
are sharing the good news
with Nigeria’s over 200 million people.
The territory is highly diverse
—more than 500 languages
and 250 ethnic groups.
It’s so encouraging to see
the response to the good news!
Some 870,000 Bible studies
are being conducted and, on average,
273 are baptized each week.
This is the Utonkon Congregation
in Benue state.
Here, 51 publishers
and 4 regular pioneers
are having good results
despite a challenging territory.
Preaching in the Utonkon territory
is enjoyable.
It is just that it is accompanied
by some problems.
One is that the territories
are very far apart,
and two, the roads are not good.
It takes us three hours
to get to some territories.
When it rains,
there is so much mud everywhere
that we need to remove our shoes
and hold them in our hands.
Whether householders
are church-goers, Muslims,
or traditional healers, they listen.
Many even accept our invitation
to attend the meetings
despite the travel challenges.
So it makes us very happy to see
that in spite of far territories
and bad roads,
we see good results.
I am enjoying my life now,
but when I lost my sight,
I thought it was all over.
As a carpenter,
I wondered how I would be able
to do my carpentry.
The thought of it worried me so much.
But as I began to learn about Jehovah
from the Bible,
I came to realize that there was hope.
That negative thinking
(that my life was over)
disappeared from my mind.
So I am very happy now.
I am joyful.
There is a brother named Joseph.
This brother can see, but he cannot walk,
and me, I can walk but cannot see.
I hold his wheelchair
and push while he directs it.
This has helped us to meet
many of our Bible students.
Before now, we were few
that went out in the field as pioneers,
but now we are many.
This shows that the example
has helped other people,
because when they see someone
who cannot walk
and someone who cannot see are pioneering,
they conclude that they can pioneer too.
This is the experience
of one of my relatives.
His name is Cletus.
He was very kind to me.
He would hold my hand and assist me
to the meetings at the Kingdom Hall.
When he got to the Kingdom Hall,
he would leave for his church.
But as he noticed how I preached
and attended meetings,
the joy I radiated,
the way we treated other people,
and our knowledge of the Scriptures,
he was impressed
and began asking many questions.
The answers he got were quite different
from what he had learned,
what they told him in church.
They continued telling him
to “get out of there”
and that he should not talk to me again.
He studied the Bible,
concluded his study, and got baptized.
Now he serves as a ministerial servant.
Sometimes they used to assign talks to both
of us to handle as a symposium,
and this made me see Cletus
as a spiritual brother
in the organization and the congregation.
This gives me joy and makes me very happy.
When people notice our activities,
they usually praise Jehovah and encourage us
to do more since they know
that the work we do
is not by our power,
but it is Jehovah who empowers us.
It is true that I am blind,
but I can see Jehovah.
I am helping other people
see Jehovah’s hand in our lives.
Even people who are disabled
can bring praise to Jehovah.
I have nothing to do other than to be joyful
and praise Jehovah for my life.
We share your joy, Brother Igbo!
Doesn’t it touch our hearts
to see Gabriel and Joseph
helping each other in the pioneer work?
Their example
encourages others to ask,
‘What prevents me from pioneering?’
Perhaps we’re moved
to ask that question too.
And did you notice
what spurred Cletus to action?
He observed the conduct of Gabriel
and other Witnesses
in the congregation.
What do we learn?
That our Christian conduct
often speaks louder
than even the most eloquent words.
Now we go to the largest continent
in the world: Asia.
Asia is home to three fifths
of the world’s people,
including some 760,000 Jehovah’s Witnesses.
The geography of Asia ranges
from tundra
to coral reefs
—from Earth’s tallest peak, Mt. Everest,
to its lowest land surface, the Dead Sea.
Asia’s cultural diversity
is greater than any other continent.
The two most populated countries
in the world
—China and India—
are here in Asia.
Let’s visit our brothers in India.
With a growing population
of about 1.3 billion people,
India is on track to become
the world’s most populous country
within a decade.
Imagine the potential for growth in India!
With 90 percent of the population
having not yet received a witness,
our 50,000 brothers and sisters
have plenty of work to do.
The good news is being preached
in territory that includes
mountain ranges, plains and plateaus,
villages, and some
of the world’s largest cities.
Hyderabad is in south-central India.
This is the Hyderabad
RTC Cross Roads Congregation
in the heart of the city.
Here, 94 publishers,
including 17 regular pioneers,
are conducting 95 Bible studies.
They were delighted
to have 252 attend last year’s Memorial.
Let’s meet Sangram.
His story actually begins
in another part of India,
where he learned the truth
with the help of Alex and Anne Das.
My wife and I serve
in the Pandharpur Sign-Language Group.
Currently, there are only three publishers
—me, my wife,
and another brother who is deaf.
We have contact
with around 100 deaf ones in our territory.
Each week, 50 to 60 deaf ones
attend the meetings.
When they come,
they bring their deaf friends with them.
They also bring their relatives.
We are so happy to see them
come regularly for the meetings
in spite of the opposition
from their families
—sometimes even severe opposition.
They are progressing well spiritually.
We are really happy
to see their spiritual advancement.
When I turned 60 and retired,
my wife and I decided to serve
where the need is greater.
To our surprise, we were asked
to support the sign-language field.
At that time,
we did not have any experience
in sign language.
Then our circuit overseer asked us
if we were ready to move
to where the need is greater.
He asked if we would move to Latur,
a city that was 521 miles
(838 km) from our home.
Once we reached the city,
we were overjoyed to see
the interest of the deaf ones.
So we decided to stay there.
Not long after we arrived there,
we met a priest whose name is Sangram.
He was the leader of a deaf association,
and he was short-tempered.
Since we wanted to meet him often,
we invited him to our home
to discuss the daily text.
He came regularly at seven o’clock
for daily text discussions.
When we moved here,
we did not know how to sign very well;
both my wife and I knew almost nothing.
But after we met Sangram
and started to teach him the Bible,
we, in turn,
started to learn sign language from him.
We were very happy.
We were really very happy.
As soon as we started studying
the Bible with Sangram,
he made changes in his life
in line with the Bible principles.
He changed his hairstyle.
He left the deaf association
of which he was the leader.
And even his personality changed.
He stopped responding angrily
to those who provoked him.
We are so happy
about the Bible discussions we had with him,
because with these
his life changed completely.
Soon he broke almost all of his bad habits.
However,
he was still unable to stop
his habit of chewing tobacco.
Now, since we loved him,
we took him to a dentist
and had his teeth cleaned.
After that visit to the dentist,
he completely stopped using tobacco.
Within six months
from starting the Bible study,
Sangram became a qualified publisher,
and after that,
he continued to progress well.
Latur now has a sign-language congregation.
My wife and I
then moved to another group.
We are now serving in Pandharpur.
When we meet
our old studies at the conventions
and see their progress, we are overjoyed.
The very thought that Jehovah has extended
to us this privilege to serve him
makes us overwhelmed with happiness.
There are no words to express how we feel.
When Sangram
showed us his big smile,
did a smile come to your face too?
That’s how the truth affects us.
And don’t we appreciate
the sacrifices that Alex and Anne made
in order to serve
where the need was greater?
They had to learn sign language
and move far away from their home.
But how did it turn out?
Alex says they are
“overwhelmed with happiness.”
Imagine that.
They were certainly rewarded
for their sacrificing spirit.
We now move west to Europe.
Europe gave birth
to the Greek and Roman Empires,
the Middle Ages, and the Renaissance.
With 160 culturally distinct groups,
Europe is immensely varied
and densely populated.
Almost 1.6 million Jehovah’s Witnesses
are actively making disciples
on this continent.
In southeastern Europe,
you’ll find Romania
—a country of nearly 20 million people.
Today, over 39,000 publishers
are conducting
almost 22,000 Bible studies.
Eight out of ten people belong
to the Romanian Orthodox Church.
The ratio of publishers
to the population varies greatly,
from 1 to 4,000 in the southeast
to 1 to 7 in Transylvania
in the northwest.
Last year, special preaching campaigns
were organized to reach those
in unassigned territories.
As a result, 85 percent
of these territories
have been given a witness.
Here are the 112 publishers
and 4 regular pioneers
of the Jibou Centru Congregation.
They serve a territory
that includes a small city, rural areas,
and large communities
of Hungarians and Roma.
Let’s see what it’s like
to make disciples there.
One of the challenges we face in our town
is that we have a small territory
compared to the number of brothers
—a ratio of 1 publisher
to about 40 inhabitants.
So we put great emphasis
on preaching in the villages around Jibou.
Jehovah blessed our efforts,
and we have more Bible studies
who make good progress.
When I was still in elementary school,
not yet baptized myself,
I used to speak about Jehovah
to one of my classmates.
Her name was Oana.
She was very interested
and even asked many questions.
We were both 12 at that time.
A little while later, after I got baptized,
Oana became my first Bible student.
I was able to show her how
to prepare well for the study.
In the evening,
we used to read the Bible together,
and we even wrote down
in a notebook our favorite Bible texts.
At the same time,
by means of different study projects,
I tried to help her
see Jehovah as a real Person.
For example, we wrote down
on a big sheet of paper
all of Jehovah’s qualities
and the way we could imitate them.
Oana made good progress,
attended the meetings,
and even started to participate.
I was so happy to see
how much joy Oana had
in learning about the truth.
Not surprisingly,
difficulties arose on the way.
Oana’s mother was not happy at all
that I was studying with her daughter.
She forbade her to study,
and one day she asked her
to choose between family and Jehovah
and put her out of the house.
Oana was 16 years old.
I encouraged Oana with the scripture
from Isaiah 41:10, 13,
which says that Jehovah
is ‘grasping our hand’
and that he will ‘help us.’
We talked a lot together,
and we prayed together.
And after only one week,
Jehovah answered our prayers.
Oana’s mother calmed down
and not only allowed her to return home
but also to attend meetings
and to continue studying together.
I was so happy!
On the 21st of July, 2018,
Oana got baptized.
Now I can finally preach
together with my spiritual sister.
Jehovah always gave me the joy I needed.
In fact, I can’t find
the words to describe
the joy I experience now.
Did you notice where and when
Beatrice started talking
to Oana about Jehovah?
In elementary school.
What a wonderful reminder
that you young ones can experience joy
by making school your personal territory!
If you haven’t tried it already,
look for someone with whom
you can share the good news.
You may be surprised at the results.
Let’s go next to North America.
Now, this continent extends
from the tiny islands near the Arctic
to the Isthmus of Panama in the south.
North America is home to almost
2.6 million Jehovah’s Witnesses.
The United States is by far
the most populous country in North America,
with over 325 million people.
Here you can find metropolitan cities
as well as vast areas
that are sparsely populated.
This territory is cared for
by more than 1.2 million publishers
and over 180,000 pioneers.
Meet the brothers and sisters
of the Juniata River
Pennsylvania German Congregation
in Mifflintown, Pennsylvania.
As we’ll see in the following report,
their unique territory is rich with people
who sincerely respect God’s Word.
The challenge is
our territory being so vast.
Sometimes you may drive
an hour and a half to two hours
just to get to the territory.
One of my favorite joys
is getting to use
the Bible constantly in this field.
They respect the Bible.
They all have one in their house.
Starting this language
almost three years ago, from a pregroup
to now a congregation with four groups
in the area, you can see the growth
and the excitement of everyone.
Honestly, I can say it’s been
the happiest time in my life
since I started working in this field.
Out in service one day,
just working from door to door,
I met a lady, and she
accepted the Greatest Man  book.
Eventually,
Memorial season came around.
I went and left an invitation with Jane.
We went back
the day before the Memorial
and were surprised when Jane said,
“Yes, we’d love to come.”
So we talked about a Bible study,
and eventually Jerry agreed
to having one as a family.
But there was a contrast
from what I’d been taught,
so I was willing
to dig for more knowledge
to try and figure out
what was going on here.
He read a scripture in Psalms
about the earth, and I said:
“Wow! Yes, all the things
I pictured myself doing in heaven
are the things I enjoy on earth.”
It made me happy.
Yet, can I really dare believe that?
The more I studied about the Bible
and looked up the scriptures,
the more I realized I never really knew
a whole lot about the Bible.
I was actually sort of in shock,
and it really put a spotlight
on who I really was.
At one point, Ben and I
went over to make a return visit.
We had planned
what we wanted to do with the family,
and it just did not lend to that at all,
and we ended up playing cards instead.
We didn’t get to share anything
from the Bible.
The family was like, ‘Oh.’
It dawned on them;
we’re real people too.
In the Pennsylvania German culture,
people teach pretty strongly
obedience to parents
to make God happy.
One day, Jerry let me know
that his dad wanted to talk to me.
Although my dad meant well,
he tried to stop the study.
But the information that he was
bringing to me about the Witnesses
was not what I saw.
What we were being taught
was directly from my Bible
that I had in my house.
How could it be wrong?
You could tell that they were just distraught
as a family with what was going on.
They wanted to do the right thing,
but they could feel all the pressure to stop.
We eventually had to cut ties
in order to continue spiritual growth.
After that, Jerry and Jane
just progressed very fast.
They were making changes in their life,
and they got to really see the freedom
that serving Jehovah gives you.
Seeing their joy grow
was irreplaceable; it was fantastic.
We have gained a hundredfold
of what we could have ever lost.
And so as we share good news
with individuals
and as they make progress,
we are very excited and happy.
I would just love for everyone to have
that opportunity to have that same joy.
What happened when Jerry and Jane
read for themselves
the truths contained in the Bible?
It deeply affected
their thoughts and emotions
and revealed
who they really were on the inside.
As a result, they now
joyfully serve Jehovah
along with their children.
Ben and Joanna used the Bible skillfully.
They let God’s Word speak for itself.
And the joy this experience
brought them is,
as Ben said,
“irreplaceable; . . . fantastic.”
That kind of joy is contagious.
We feel it too just watching them.
Next we go to Oceania.
This is the collective name for Australia
and for the more than 10,000 islands
in the Pacific Ocean
between Asia and the Americas.
Some of Oceania’s islands,
are known as “high islands”
because they were developed
as volcanic eruptions
built up land over time.
“Low islands,”
such as the country of Kiribati,
are made of coral and sometimes
barely reach above sea level.
Over 100,000 Jehovah’s Witnesses
are hard at work
in this beautiful territory.
Fiji is an archipelago
of some 300 islands
scattered over 3 million
square kilometers,
or about 1 million square miles.
This territory is cared for
by some 3,000 publishers
and over 500 pioneers.
In the last service year,
they conducted over 4,700 Bible studies.
These brothers and sisters
are in the South Suva
English Congregation.
Let’s see what unique challenges
our brothers face there.
Many, if not all, in our territory
know about God’s Word, the Bible.
However, they are taught false teachings.
The challenge arises
when customs and traditions
conflict with Bible teachings.
As they study and progress,
they face opposition from their family
and, of course, there’s the social pressure
that comes from their community.
Added to this are the materialistic goals
that are put before them.
So all of this combined really poses
a challenge with these ones progressing.
Despite these challenges,
some of them eventually do
study the Bible with us.
Some have become Jehovah’s friend
and made the truth their own.
So to be able to show these ones
from God’s Word,
the Bible, that Jehovah is a God of love
and to see their reaction
—that in itself is a wonderful blessing.
I used to study with this young girl.
She wanted to make progress in the truth.
But in order for her to do that,
she had to overcome these two big obstacles:
One was the career that she had,
and the other was the obstacle
of her unbelieving family.
I really didn’t want
to impose the truth on her,
so my goal was to help her
understand what the Bible teaches,
help her see the big picture,
and let her draw her own conclusion.
I try to be a good example to her by enjoying
the ministry myself, you know,
and helping her to understand
that as I’m out in the ministry,
I know I’m working along with Jehovah.
Although she had a high-paying job,
she wasn’t happy.
She was always stressed.
Then she sees Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Despite being out there in the ministry
on hot, sunny days or rainy days,
they’re happy.
She knew and was convinced
that she would be really happy
if she put Jehovah first in her life.
So eventually she had to tell
her mother-in-law
that she had resigned from her employment.
So her mother-in-law said:
“And now you’ve resigned?
“So, what are you going to do?
Are you going to go preaching?”
And then she said:
“The decision that I have made
is going to make me happy.
It’s going to make Jehovah happy as well.”
In seeing the big picture,
she was able to take a stand for true worship
and be on Jehovah’s side
of universal sovereignty.
I attended
the Pioneer Service School with her.
You know, what really made me happy
was seeing ones like her
being happy in doing the same work
of helping others come to serve Jehovah
and knowing the fact
that Jehovah had actually used me
in helping others
find the truth and serve Jehovah as well.
To some, Fiji may seem like paradise.
But, as we learned,
the people of that beautiful land
face the same issues
as people everywhere
—stress, pressure-filled jobs,
and an uncertain future.
As Makereta’s student learned,
putting Jehovah first
is the only guarantee
for true, lasting happiness.
Our final destination is South America.
South America is home
to earth’s largest river, the Amazon,
as well as the driest place,
the Atacama Desert.
Animal life on this continent
is rich and diverse,
particularly its bird population.
With some 3,000 species of birds,
South America is sometimes
called the bird continent.
More than 400 million people live here,
including over 1.7 million
Jehovah’s Witnesses.
There is tremendous
language diversity
in South America.
Let’s visit Bolivia,
a country of more than 11 million people
and a wide range of indigenous cultures.
Bolivia presents unique challenges
to our about 28,000 brothers
and sisters who live here.
Their territory includes
the towering Andes Mountains in the west
and rain forests in the north.
The publishers endure weather
that ranges from burning heat
and tropical humidity
to freezing winds.
To reach remote territories,
they may have to cross rivers
and drive for hours
on poorly maintained mountain roads
—sometimes just a few millimeters,
or inches, from the precipice!
How Jehovah is blessing
their courageous efforts!
In the last service year alone,
more than 42,000 Bible studies
were conducted.
Here are the 35 publishers
and 8 regular pioneers
of the Norte Quechua Congregation.
To reach and seek out those
who speak Quechua,
the publishers travel long distances.
Sadly, many
of the Quechua-speaking community
have been victims of prejudice
and do not receive basic education
in their language.
Our brothers and sisters spend hours
helping interested ones learn to read
so they can
comprehend basic Bible truths.
The response to the good news
in Bolivia is very positive.
But, as we’ll learn in the following report,
Bible students
frequently face opposition,
often from those closest to them.
When an interested person begins to learn
the truth from the Bible,
at first the family is happy for them,
and their friends are happy too.
But when the teachings of the Bible
are in opposition to popular customs,
those family members and friends
may become their main source of opposition.
However, we have also seen many,
many blessings from Jehovah.
For example,
although the challenges may be great,
we see Jehovah’s hand
working in the lives
of each of these individuals,
because they make huge  changes.
They take hold of Jehovah,
they see him as their God,
and they leave behind popular customs
and start to make progress.
It is a beautiful blessing
to see a Bible student
get baptized, filled with joy.
Lydia was a young woman
who was very interested in spiritual things.
But just like anyone
who does not study the Bible,
she had habits
that were not pleasing to Jehovah.
She liked to socialize with her workmates,
and at times,
she went out drinking with her friends
—sometimes drinking a little too much.
However, despite that,
she was very humble.
You could see that she was very sincere;
she appreciated good things.
After seeing
these beautiful qualities in her,
I said, “Jehovah can make
other good qualities grow in her heart.”
So we set the date to start the study.
We always tried to be consistent
and to not miss a study.
When a publisher does not miss
the day and time for the study,
the Devil is not given
the opportunity to disrupt it.
Some teachings Lydia accepted immediately,
but others took more time.
Her manner of dress was not appropriate;
she wore tight clothing
and very short skirts.
How did we correct that?
By showing her in the Bible
that women should dress
“with modesty and soundness of mind.”
It was not easy, but she did it.
After that, when she attended meetings,
she looked like one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
When you plant a literal plant,
you start to water it
and it keeps growing.
While you are sleeping,
you don’t know how those changes happen.
It happens exactly the same way
with a Bible student.
As time passed, Lydia expressed
the desire to be baptized.
After that, she just kept making progress
and started to serve as a regular pioneer.
Later,
she was invited to serve at Bethel.
She has been serving
at Bethel for 16 years.
I am one of the 70 persons
who learned the truth from Edith.
Her example helped me
to be considerate, to be insightful,
and also to be consistent
in making disciples.
Over the years,
I have learned so much
about disciple-making,
especially that this work is not ours.
When Bible students make progress,
it is thanks to the blessing of Jehovah,
because He sees their hearts.
So we’re not working for a man;
we’re working for the Most High God.
How encouraging to see
ones like Lydia learn the truth
and with God’s help
make the needed changes!
And what joy it continues to bring
to her teacher, Edith,
to see her serving Jehovah today!
As Edith says,
“When Bible students make progress,
“it is thanks to the blessing of Jehovah,
because He sees their hearts.”
Well, in our time together,
we’ve circled the earth
to bring you these experiences.
Did you notice any patterns
for joyful disciple-making?
Here are just four patterns
that stood out to me.
We saw that the first step
is to seek out all those
with the right heart condition.
Our brothers in Nigeria,
Fiji, and Bolivia
spread the good news
despite the great distances,
poor roads, and extreme weather.
Gabriel and Joseph teamed up
to overcome their disabilities,
and their example
inspires us to do more.
Alex and Anne Das
learned sign language
and moved more than 500 miles
to serve where the need was greater.
Then we saw a second vital element
in disciple-making: the “art of teaching.”
We know, for example,
that helping students
to reason on the Scriptures
is very effective.
That was the case with Makereta.
Using the Scriptures,
she helped her student
draw her own conclusions
about the truth.
Benjamin and Joanna
skillfully used the Bible
with Jerry and Jane.
The power of the Scriptures
touched their hearts.
And when opposition came,
they stood firm
because they were convinced
that they were learning the truth
from God’s inspired Word.
A third element of disciple-making
involves helping our students
to develop good study habits
and a regular spiritual routine.
Edith and Lydia
made it a goal never to miss a study.
Beatrice showed creativity,
developing projects
like that big sheet of paper to help Oana
know Jehovah as a real Person.
And fourth: In every experience,
we saw that disciple-making involves love
—showing genuine love.
Alex and Anne took Sangram
to the dentist because they love him.
What motivated Cletus
to study the Bible?
The joy radiated by Jehovah’s people
and the loving way we treat others.
Angeline gave up
her stressful job and put Jehovah first.
Why?
Because she
observed Jehovah’s Witnesses,
who out of self-sacrificing love
were motivated to preach the good news
on hot days and rainy days,
and she especially noted
the joy it brought them.
As you can see,
the joy of Jehovah
comes from sincere efforts
to help people
and Jehovah’s blessing on those efforts.
When you see and hear your brothers’
and sisters’ heartfelt expressions,
how does it make you feel?
Like Paul and Barnabas,
we too may have challenges
along the way, even some setbacks.
But nothing compares
with the deep joy and happiness
that results from helping others
come to know and love Jehovah.
There are still
honesthearted ones out there,
and they desperately need the truth.
It’s experiences like the ones
we’ve just listened to
that help us to see that Jehovah
is truly speeding up the work.
The next time you go out in service,
picture yourself working side by side
with your brothers and sisters
around the world.
Just as in a search and rescue effort,
we may feel we’re not finding
survivors in our area.
But just one report of a rescue victim
being pulled out alive
spurs on all the volunteers
to double their efforts.
Imagine the joy Jehovah feels
when he looks down and sees us
across the globe
working “shoulder to shoulder”
in the greatest rescue mission
of all time!
So keep calling out;
keep searching
through the rubble of this dying system
to find those crying out for help.
And may your joy abound as you do so.
How exciting to see the ways
that our brothers and sisters
are helping people
to respond to the good news!
How can we assist those
with whom we study the Bible
to progress to dedication and baptism?
The following symposium discusses five areas
in which our Bible students need our help.
Each speaker
will introduce the one to follow.
Brother Mark Sanderson of the Governing Body
will present the first talk, entitled
“Help Your Bible Students to . . .
Feed Themselves Spiritually.”
Before our Lord Jesus returned to heaven,
he gave what has been called
the great commission.
He said: “Go, therefore, and make disciples
“of people of all the nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father
and of the Son and of the holy spirit.”
No doubt you have those words
in your mind as well.
Jesus was not satisfied
that people should just
come to know his teachings.
Jesus wanted people
to come to love his teachings
so that they would act on them,
so that they would live by them,
and so that they would become
his true disciples.
Now, why did Jesus want people
to become his disciples
and live by his teachings?
Well, it’s because of something
that we read here
at John 13:17.
Now, notice what Jesus said here:
“If you know these things,
happy you are if you do them.”
What’s the point?
Jesus was saying that people
would find real happiness,
they would find the way of salvation,
they would have a relationship
with his precious heavenly Father
if they would just come to know
and do the things that he had taught.
Well, brothers and sisters,
in this symposium,
we are going to discuss
five different things
that our Bible students need to do,
that they need to progress in,
if they are going to become
true disciples of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Let’s talk about the first.
What is the most basic need
that our Bible students have?
Well, it’s what Jesus talked about here
in Matthew chapter 5.
Let’s read it together.
Matthew 5:3
—Jesus said: “Happy are those conscious
“of their [notice] spiritual need,
since the Kingdom
of the heavens belongs to them.”
What’s the point?
Well, Jesus showed
that honesthearted people
have a spiritual need.
They have a need to come to know God
and to have a relationship with him
if they are really going to be happy.
Therefore, we need to teach
our Bible students the very first thing:
how they can fill that spiritual need
by learning
about their heavenly Father, Jehovah.
As they fill that need, as they come
to have that relationship with God,
that is the way to true happiness.
That means more than just
feeding people information.
You know, there is a saying
that’s very familiar to most of us.
It says, “Give a man a fish,
feed him for a day;
teach him how to fish,
feed him for a lifetime.”
What’s the point?
If we can teach our Bible students
how to feed themselves spiritually,
then they have the way in front of them
to a close relationship with God,
to strong faith,
and to becoming
real disciples of Jesus Christ.
Well, in the following demonstration
that you’ll see on video,
just notice how our Bible teacher
helps her student to be able to do this.
. . . just sum up the whole article.
Got it.
I find the answers in all that.
It’s more than just the answers.
I’m with it; I’m all about study.
Which do you
remember more from our studies,
the answers or the things
that touch your heart?
Mm.
Yeah, like,
when we talked about immorality,
you knew the answer,
but you didn’t seem totally convinced
in here.
Let’s try and find that answer.
Chapter 6?
Mm-hm.
“But whoever practices sexual immorality
is sinning against his own body.”
I’m not sure why,
but it made me think of Mum and Dad
(his constant cheating, actually),
Mum’s humiliation,
the divorce, all the misery.
I didn’t want that.
I began to realize
how right Jehovah is
because of what Neeta
called meditation.
It’s not about clearing your mind
to find inner peace;
it’s totally different.
It’s asking how Jehovah
feels about something
and then asking
what that means for me.
What did you notice in the video?
It’s true that Neeta showed
her Bible student the tools.
But what more did she do?
She also helped her
to see that the answers
were not the most important thing.
The most important thing was having
the information come to touch her heart
so that she would be moved to act
on what she learned.
Well, how can we help our students
to be able to feed themselves spiritually?
Well, from the very beginning,
once the study has been established,
we want to teach our students
how to prepare each week for the study.
Now, this might be
something very new to them,
so we’re going to have to go through it
step-by-step, showing them how to prepare.
It might also involve
having to help them see
how they can buy out time
from their schedule
so that they can do
what’s necessary to prepare.
And then don’t forget to commend them.
Because this might be
very new for many of our students,
when they make the effort to prepare,
make sure you give appropriate commendation.
But then what’s the next thing?
This is something that we
sometimes forget, brothers.
It’s the need to teach our students to pray
before every single study session.
Now, why is this important?
Well, once again,
we want our students not just to be thinking
in terms of acquiring information
—not to take
an academic approach to their study—
but instead to be always thinking
about how what they’re studying
connects them
with their heavenly Father, Jehovah,
so that they’re building up
a relationship with him.
As Proverbs chapter 2 says,
if we call out to Jehovah
for knowledge, for wisdom,
for understanding,
Jehovah will help us.
He’ll help our student to gain
that knowledge that they need
to build up a good relationship with him.
And then we want to do practical things.
We want to help our students
to become familiar
with the digital tools that we have
at our disposal for study.
That means helping them
to install on their phone,
on their tablet, or whatever device
they have JW Library®
and showing them how to use
Watchtower ONLINE LIBRARY ™
so that they can get the answers
that they need to their questions.
Do you know, as of February of this year,
Watchtower ONLINE LIBRARY
is now available
in more than 700 languages?
So people virtually all over the world
have access to these wonderful tools.
Don’t forget also to show them jw.org®
and JW Broadcasting® and show them
how they can keep up-to-date
with these wonderful provisions from Jehovah.
Well, now, we’ve shown them
how to prepare for their lesson,
we’ve shown them
how to use the online tools,
but what are the next progressive steps
we want to take
so that they
can feed themselves spiritually?
Well, of course, as Psalm 1 tells us,
if we want to be truly happy
and truly well-fed spiritually,
we have to “read [God’s] law
in an undertone day and night.”
So we want to teach our students
to get into that good habit
of reading God’s Word,
the Bible, every day.
And then what about the next step?
We want our students also to be able
to prepare for congregation meetings.
Now, if we’ve shown them
how to use JW Library,
this is really easy, isn’t it?
All we have to do
is basically hit that Meetings tab,
and when we do,
well, all the information
for our midweek meeting
and our weekend meeting is all there for us.
It will help our student to see
that this program of spiritual feeding
is something they can access
and something they can benefit from.
And what about research questions?
Now, brothers and sisters,
if you have a good student,
they’re going to be
asking lots of questions.
And this is where it’s sometimes
difficult for us as teachers.
We would like to be able to just rush in,
open our Bible, and answer
every question that our student has.
But what’s the better course?
Well, we want to be modest.
And instead of answering
all the questions for them,
how much better it is
to go back to those tools!
Go back to JW Library,
go back to Watchtower ONLINE LIBRARY,
and show the student
how they can find the answers
to their own Bible questions.
As we do that, we’re helping them
to build for the future.
Well, brothers, if we can do this
—if we can accomplish this goal
of teaching our students
how to feed themselves spiritually
—we are not just feeding them today.
We’re not just
handing them a fish, as it were.
Instead, we’re teaching
them how to fish.
We’re teaching them
how to feed themselves
spiritually for a lifetime.
Even more important,
we’re fulfilling the commission
that Jesus gave us.
We are making
real disciples of Christ Jesus,
who are well-fed spiritually.
And, as a result, they will not wither up
or they will not blow away,
but instead they will stand firm
as true disciples of Christ Jesus.
Brother Ronald Curzan,
a helper with the Teaching Committee,
will now consider
the next talk in this symposium,
“Help Your Bible Students
to . . . Attend Meetings.”
It brings us great joy
to help our Bible students
feed themselves spiritually
so that they can continue
to make spiritual progress
and move ever closer to serving Jehovah.
The spiritual food that they digest
at their weekly Bible study
or their own personal research
is very beneficial.
It fills that spiritual need,
that void, in them.
It’s also very appetizing,
much like eating an appetizer.
An appetizer is something that is served
before serving the main course.
It’s meant to whet the appetite
before eating the main course.
Have you invited your Bible student
to enjoy the main course
of spiritual food at the Kingdom Hall?
Many have, and they have seen their students
advance and really become happier.
But some have held back.
They feel that they don’t want
to rush their student into anything,
put too much pressure on them.
But this is exactly what your student needs.
Invite them as soon as possible.
Never hold back because you could
possibly be holding them back
from making progress.
Think about how the meetings have
helped you personally and your family.
And think about how the meetings
will help your student.
King David knew that finding joy
and true happiness
only comes from drawing close to Jehovah
and worshipping Him at his house.
Notice what he says at Psalm 65:4.
He says: “Happy is the one whom you choose
“and bring near to reside in your courtyards.
“We will be satisfied
with the goodness of your house,
your holy temple.”
Well, no doubt your Bible student
is happy with their Bible study
and what they’re learning about Jehovah.
They have deep gratitude.
Well, what is gratitude?
Gratitude means “appreciating
what kindness is shown to you.”
But it also means “showing appreciation
and returning kindness.”
Worshipping Jehovah
is how we return kindness,
show our appreciation and our gratitude.
And when we do this, Jehovah is happy,
which makes us happy as well.
Notice in the following dramatization
how Neeta
invites her Bible study,
Jade, to attend meetings.
Yeah,
a sister died in that attack;
it was really sad.
So that’s “time and unexpected events”?
Well, it’s one of those cases where . . .
What about when someone survives
because they’re at the meeting?
That’s, um—
I don’t get it.
Straight answer
—Does Jehovah protect Witnesses or not?
It’s funny.
My meeting part tonight covers that point.
Why don’t you come?
You’re really pushing those meetings,
aren’t you?
What time?
I couldn’t believe I missed her part,
but it wasn’t a total loss.
Neeta had said, “At the Hall,
everyone loves one another.”
But until I’d felt it, I had no idea.
I told her I’d be back.
How did Jade feel when she
attended her first meeting?
Well, she really enjoyed it, and she
remembered what Neeta told her
‘that everyone at the Kingdom Hall
loves one another,’
and Jade had to admit,
“But until I’d felt it, I had no idea.”
She could’ve read it.
She could’ve heard about it.
But until she was there and feeling the love—
She wanted to come back.
Yes, attending meetings goes hand-in-hand
with making spiritual progress.
As much as they love their
home Bible study, it’s like an appetizer.
It’s one part
of the spiritual feeding program
that Jehovah provides at the Kingdom Hall
—that main course provided
through the faithful slave.
So during each Bible study, it would be
good to explain to your student
what has affected you, what impacted you,
to help make wise decisions,
what encouraged you.
Share it with them, and share a point
that would help them.
Again, whet their appetite.
Pique their interest.
And when they come to the meeting,
they will see true Christian love,
unfailing love in action.
They will see others
trying to put into action,
applying, what they’re
learning at the meetings.
They will make true friends
that will help support them
and help them to progress spiritually.
Attending meetings can be a bit intimidating
for some and cause some anxiety,
so it’d be good to explain to them what
they might expect when they attend.
And one of the best ways
to do this is showing them a video
entitled What Happens at a Kingdom Hall?
And this will really put them at ease
and really help them have less anxiety
when they do finally come.
It’d be good to also invite others
to the Bible study so that when your student
does finally make it to the meeting,
they will see many familiar faces
and feel much more comfortable.
And let the friends in the congregation know
that your student is coming to the meeting
so that when they walk through the door,
they can come over,
give them a warm welcome,
make them feel comfortable.
This is what Neeta did for Jade,
and it worked so well.
It helped her to progress.
Your student is a guest in Jehovah’s house.
Make them feel special,
and make them feel comfortable
by offering practical help before the meeting
as well as during the meeting.
So, well in advance,
whet their appetite on what they
will learn once they come to the meeting.
It’s like showing them a menu
of what they will enjoy
with the main course at the meeting.
Offer to provide a ride to your students
and have them sit with you at the meetings.
It would also be good to make sure
that they have the publications
that will be discussed at the meeting,
either hardcopy or have it downloaded
on their device.
As we have discussed, attending meetings
and enjoying the main course
of spiritual food at the Kingdom Hall
will help your student in so many ways.
It will make them feel happier,
help them to continue progressing,
so they can draw close to Jehovah.
The apostle Paul
gives us some more indications
on what your student can enjoy.
Please notice with me
what he says at Colossians 2:7.
He said in verse 6 that they
should ‘keep on walking.’
But then in verse 7,
that they should be “rooted
and built up in him [Jesus]
“and being stabilized in the faith,
just as you were taught,
and overflowing with thanksgiving.”
So their appreciation, their gratitude
—they will want to go
to the meetings and worship Jehovah.
So continue to find joy in helping
your student feed themselves spiritually,
but also help them to appreciate
attending meetings on a weekly basis.
Make it a way of life for them
so that they can enjoy everlasting life.
Brother Kenneth Cook,
a member of the Governing Body,
will now consider
the next part of this symposium
entitled “Help Your Bible Students to . . .
Avoid Bad Associations.”
To begin, let’s illustrate the importance
of helping our Bible students
to avoid bad association,
and we’ll use the example
of a prospector.
When a prospector
finds something valuable
deep underground,
what does he do?
He must make certain
that the way in is secured
and that it’s well supported.
Otherwise, the treasure
might be plundered
or the way in could collapse.
This is similar to what
we must be aware of when it comes
to helping our Bible students.
We work hard to reach the hearts
of responsive ones, don’t we?
When we do, with Jehovah’s help,
we continue assisting them
to secure and protect their hearts.
This includes protecting
their growing faith in Jehovah.
Otherwise, the Devil
will ruin what has been done
and strip them of their faith.
If we are to help our students to progress,
we must keep in mind why avoiding
bad associations is so important.
We must also have in mind
how we can help
our students to do this.
Let’s first look at why
this is so important.
In order for your Bible students
to gain Jehovah’s friendship,
they will likely need to make some changes
in their choice of association.
Why?
Because your student’s progress
is greatly affected
by his or her choice of friends.
Proverbs 13:20
explains why this is true.
Please go to that verse,
Proverbs 13:20.
It reads:
“The one walking with the wise
will become wise,
but the one who has dealings
with the stupid will fare badly.”
Why does a person’s choice
of associates matter?
Because we cannot change
what the verse says here
—“The one [who is] walking . . .
[or] has dealings with the stupid
will fare badly.”
The fact is that our friends affect us
in either a good way
or a bad way, don’t they?
In the Hebrew language,
to have “dealings with” someone
can mean to “keep company” with a person,
that is, to be friends with a person.
If a Bible student seeks company
with senseless people,
he or she will not progress spiritually.
That’s why it’s so important
to help our Bible students
to avoid the problems
that come with bad association.
On the other hand, from Proverbs 13:20,
we learn that “the one walking
with the wise will become wise.”
Here the idea of walking with someone
involves choosing
to spend time with a person.
So help your Bible students
to choose well.
Wholesome associates in the truth
will help your students to break free
from worldly thinking and unclean practices.
With this in mind, now that we
have considered why we must help them,
let’s look some more
at how we can do so.
In the following dramatization,
note how Neeta helps her Bibles student
to seek out and select
good associates or friends.
“Do not be misled.
Bad associations spoil useful habits.”
OK, but what are good associations?
Well, we have wholesome gatherings
with our brothers and sisters
from the congregation,
and we eat and talk.
And some like to play musical instruments,
and they’ll do
renditions of original songs.
And we have a really nice time.
Yeah, I don’t do that.
It’s not boring.
Sure it’s not.
Well, what do you do?
Yeah, you wouldn’t do that.
It’s not exactly wholesome.
But you have to have fun, right?
True, and we do.
See for yourself.
I’m having some people
over this weekend.
Why don’t you come?
It wasn’t the club,
but it was still fun.
Did you take note of how Neeta helped
her Bible student to seek good friends?
For one thing,
she was empathetic, wasn’t she?
Neeta understood that her Bible student
would need to see
and experience
some things for herself.
Also, she invited her student
to a gathering of brothers and sisters,
and the impact
of that positive experience was obvious.
Likewise, when it comes
to how we can help our Bible students,
remember to be empathetic as well.
All of us naturally desire to have friends.
Keep that in mind
as you strive to help your students.
It can be difficult for them
to seek out good associates.
After all, this is all new for them.
Added to this,
as your students accept
and apply Bible standards in their lives,
some of their former friends
will likely reject them.
You can prepare them for this
by showing them what the Bible says,
for example, at 1 Peter 4:4.
In that verse, we are made aware
that people would be “puzzled”
over the changes we make
in order to please Jehovah.
It also tells us that people
might “speak abusively” of us
and reject our changes.
This could even include
members of one’s own family,
and that fact might be difficult
for your students to accept.
How can you help your students
at a time like that?
By giving them a real choice.
Along with helping them
to draw close to Jehovah,
help your students to replace
bad associations with good ones.
Be a friend to your students.
Introduce them
to others in the congregation.
Also, whenever possible,
when the study is over,
why not stay for a while,
talk with them, spend some time,
and really get to know them?
Call your student
whenever he or she is sick.
Show personal interest.
Sit with them at the meetings,
and invite others
to sit in on the study with you.
And as illustrated in the video,
like Neeta,
include your student
in upbuilding social activities.
One formerly unbelieving husband,
who is now an elder,
recalls how a brother helped him.
He said that the brother
took a day off from work
just to watch a ball game with him,
and he thought to himself,
‘He’s normal.’
It’s also important to help
your Bible student understand
that bad association
is not limited to morally debased people.
The Bible tells us that “the whole world
“[the whole world] is lying
in the power of the wicked one.”
So, then, kindly help your students to see
that we must also avoid association
with those who may appear to be morally clean
but who lack faith in the true God Jehovah.
In all of these ways,
we see why we must help
and how we can help our Bible students
to avoid bad associations
and accept good ones.
Remember, we must help them
to secure the way into their heart
and protect their faith.
As your students do this
by avoiding bad associations,
they will no doubt gain
many lifelong friends, including you.
And whether your student is a family member
or someone you meet in the ministry,
you will both have precious memories
and joy that will last forever.
Brother Anthony Morris,
a member of the Governing Body,
will now consider
the next talk of this symposium,
“Help Your Bible Students
to . . . Overcome Unclean Habits.”
In this part of our symposium,
we are addressing why and how
to help our Bible students
overcome unclean habits.
Now, first of all,
why overcome unclean habits?
As teachers, we need to reach the heart
of those we study with,
to understand that the God we worship
expects this to stop.
Let me show you a verse
that you’re familiar with,
many of you, in Peter’s letter
—1 Peter chapter one.
And we could use these thoughts here
to endeavor to reach the heart
of those who we’re studying with,
why this unclean habit must stop.
Let’s read verses 14 through 16:
“As obedient children, stop being molded
“by the desires
you formerly had in your ignorance,
“but like the Holy One who called you,
“become holy yourselves in all your conduct,
“for it is written:
‘You must be holy,
because I am holy.’”
So it’s very clear here.
There are things
that our Bible studies practiced before
—these unclean habits in their ignorance,
before they knew Jehovah,
before they knew his requirements.
They need to understand he is the Holy One,
and they have to have their conduct line up
with the Holy One that we worship.
And this is not a suggestion,
as quoting the scripture
here in verse 16, it’s a must.
They must be holy because Jehovah is holy.
Now in the following dramatization,
note how Neeta helps her Bible student
to overcome an unclean habit.
Neeta and I talked about it.
Part of me felt a bit scared,
part a bit crazy.
Me knocking on doors?
But I knew
this was the right thing to do.
‘A minister should also be free
‘from all nonmedical use of addictive
or mind-altering substances.’
Nonmedical?
But taking something
when I’m feeling a little stressed,
like maybe, I don’t know, a little weed
—that’s OK, right?
And it’s for the stress.
I guess I didn’t quite understand
what “medical” meant.
So will we see you during the week?
Yeah.
Thank you, Jade.
We’ll be back.
You can guess what
our next few studies were about.
“And you should continue
to be made new
in your dominant mental attitude.”
Knowing it was wrong was easy.
Figuring out how to cope
without it wasn’t.
Beating it
felt impossible.
Being free of it
to serve Jehovah
felt amazing!
Next, let’s discuss the “how to help.”
We see how our Sister Neeta
endeavored to help her Bible student
when she became aware of that unclean habit.
But there are some nice thoughts
as to how to help our Bible students
overcome unclean habits.
Now, we want to be candid
and clear from the Scriptures,
but always remember,
we need to be warm
and we need to be tactful with them.
These habits have a grip on them,
and we need to display
not a judgmental attitude but patience
and, really, just imitating Jehovah,
helping them to apply Bible counsel.
Now, it’s important for the teacher
to understand what we’re going to share
with you next,
and then, if you have it clear,
you’re going to be able
to impart it to your Bible student.
Let’s read a familiar scripture
in Ephesians chapter 4.
And it’s important to understand
what we read here
as related to helping them
overcome unclean habits
that go contrary to Bible principles.
Now notice in Ephesians chapter 4,
verses 22, 23, and 24:
“You were taught
to put away the old personality
“that conforms
to your former course of conduct
“and that is being corrupted
according to its [that’s the old personality]
“deceptive desires.
“And you should continue to be made new
“in your dominant mental attitude,
“and should put on the new personality
“that was created according to God’s will
in true righteousness and loyalty.”
So we have to understand this clearly,
and then we need to teach our students.
There’s the old personality.
Those of us that came in the truth
had old personalities.
We know exactly what Paul
is writing to the Ephesians about
—and that’s a former course of conduct
that is no longer acceptable.
But the key to being able
to put on the new personality
and put away the old one
is found in verse 23:
“Be made new
in your dominant mental attitude.”
So, what does that mean?
That means your
Bible students’ thinking
has to change.
The thinking has to change
into this new personality
—thinking that’s guided and directed
by Jehovah and his Word.
Now to illustrate what I mean by that,
I’ll tell you a personal experience
with a Bible study that I had many years ago,
and I really appreciated
how Jehovah helped him.
Now, when I studied with him, he was 70,
early 70’s, and he had smoked cigarettes
since he was eight years old.
That’s phenomenal.
I smoked before I became
one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
But decades?
No.
So smoking had a grip on him,
that old personality,
and that was very discouraging
and difficult for him.
However, he was making progress,
coming to meetings.
And this one example
that happened with his life
will illustrate the point we’re making here.
So I’m working in a department
there at the convention,
and it’s near the lobby area.
And I notice my Bible study head out,
and the program is ongoing.
He heads out the door.
And out of personal interest
(not to police him)
I went to go see; is he OK?
So he’s about a block down
from the lobby of the convention center,
and you know what?
Smoking a cigarette.
So he notices me come up behind him,
and it just hits him, and he’s contrite.
The shame is all in his face,
and he throws that cigarette down
and stomps it with his shoe.
So when I get close to him, he says:
“I just— I’ve been asking Jehovah,
‘Forgive me; forgive me.’
When this happens,
I always ask him to forgive me.”
And I said: “Well, that’s commendable.
“That’s so important.
I know you love Jehovah.
“However, here’s what you need to learn.
“See, you need to approach Jehovah before,
“and supplicate him
before you take that cigarette.”
And that’s where
our Bible students need help.
It’s important that they
have to supplicate Jehovah
before that unclean habit overwhelms them.
And I’m happy to say he did.
He turned his back on that.
He supplicated Jehovah.
And boy, imagine smoking all those decades,
and he died a faithful servant
of Jehovah God.
So help your Bible students.
And keep that in mind;
they have to change their thinking,
and it’s our responsibility
to make that clear to them.
Now, teach them too
by means of practical assistance.
Be a dear friend for them;
stay there for them.
Be available when they need help
with something, and just love them.
Don’t be judgmental.
Be supportive, and help them
to overcome these unclean habits.
And very important,
teach them,
“‘Do not give up.’
Jehovah loves you.
“He wants you to rejoice
in the progress you’re making.
He loves you.”
And what you’ll experience
when they become a dedicated Witness,
your fellow servant of God,
you will have a friend forever.
Now, next on our symposium, the final talk,
Brother Geoffrey Jackson,
a member of the Governing Body,
is going to consider the talk
“Help Your Bible Students to Develop
a Personal Relationship With Jehovah.”
How does a father feel
when he receives
an unexpected gift from his child?
Of course, his heart is warmed.
Why?
Because he sees this
as an expression of the child’s love for him.
Well, in a similar way,
our loving heavenly Father, Jehovah,
does not want
to force us to serve him.
He’s interested in our motives,
and he wants us to serve him out of love.
Why?
Because Jehovah
realizes that love has power.
It gives us the power
to make changes in our life.
And also, it helps us
to be able to overcome
temptations and opposition.
But that presents a challenge for us
when we’re conducting Bible studies.
How so?
Well, how can we develop
within the hearts of the Bible students
a love for Jehovah
without forcing them
or trying to put pressure on them?
Well, that’s something
that we need to think about.
During these talks, we’ve certainly enjoyed
this series of videos—haven’t we?—
that have helped us to see
how Jade has made progress
with her Bible study and how Neeta
has helped her all along.
When we think about this, we see
that Jade has made good progress
and she’s up to a point now
where she has a love for Jehovah.
In this final video, let’s watch how Jade
faces a very difficult problem
and we’ll see how her love for Jehovah
helps her to overcome this problem.
But, Mum, listen.
No, Jade, you listen!
Isn’t this just another
one of your phases?
It’s time to move on, Love.
The holidays are our time.
It’s all I get from you.
Promise me you’ll be here.
Promise!
I really don’t want to disappoint her,
but I can’t disappoint Jehovah.
Of course!
You love them both.
Don’t you think he can help you?
Talk to him.
I spent a long time
pouring out my heart to him.
And I remembered something
from one of the Psalms:
“I will walk in your truth.
Unify my heart
to fear your name.”
Yo, so tell me.
I remember someone once claiming
to be “all about the promises.”
Made any good ones lately?
Absolutely.
Well, that certainly was
a difficult problem, wasn’t it?
Her mother wanted to force her
to join her in a worldly holiday.
But what helped Jade?
As she said, it’s true
that she loves her mother
but she didn’t want
to disappoint Jehovah.
And notice, Neeta didn’t try to go through
all the pros and cons with her.
She realized that Jade
had a love for Jehovah,
and she just simply said,
‘Ask him for help.’
And Jehovah did help her.
So how can we make sure
that our Bible students
come to a similar point in their life,
where they love Jehovah?
Well, we find some help
with regard to that question
if we turn to the first book of John.
So, please, turn with me
to 1 John chapter 4,
and we’re going to read verse 8:
“Whoever does not love
has not come to know God,
because God is love.”
What is this telling us?
See, basically, it is saying
that if our Bible student
doesn’t love God,
that’s because they
haven’t really come to know God yet.
And if we turn the page to verse 19,
there’s a secondary point that’s mentioned.
It says: “We love,
because he first loved us.”
What does this highlight?
Well, for our Bible student to love Jehovah,
they need to come to know him
but also they need
to see his love in their lives.
So that puts a responsibility on us
to help them to identify Jehovah’s love
and then have this love
for Jehovah build in their hearts.
We can do that by asking questions, such as:
“How have you seen
Jehovah’s love in your life?”
or “What does this Bible account
teach us about Jehovah’s love?”
In other words, although we
are interested in explaining
what Jehovah has done
by highlighting what he does,
how he does it, and when he does it,
we would never want
to forget the vital question:
Why does he do something?
The answer is, because of his love.
And we help our Bible student to see that.
You see, Jehovah’s power
enables him to do things.
His wisdom helps him and guides him,
along with justice,
to do things the right way.
But what is it that motivates Jehovah?
It’s his love, isn’t it?
And asking the question
why Jehovah does things
helps to highlight that point.
So as we’re teaching our Bible students,
we need them to see
that Jehovah really does love them
and he wants them
to succeed in their life.
Also, we could perhaps share with them
some of the times when we personally
have experienced Jehovah’s love
—perhaps in the way
that Jehovah has answered our prayers.
But in connection with this,
there’s another scripture that can help us.
If you turn with me, please,
to the book of Isaiah
—Isaiah chapter 48,
and we’re going to look
at verses 17 and 18.
Isaiah 48:17, 18:
“This is what Jehovah says,
your Repurchaser,
“the Holy One of Israel:
‘I, Jehovah, am your God,
“‘the One teaching you to benefit yourself,
“‘the One guiding you
in the way you should walk.
“‘If only you would pay attention
to my commandments!
“‘Then your peace would become
just like a river
and your righteousness
like the waves of the sea.’”
Do you see the point
that’s being made here?
We need to help
our Bible students to understand
that Jehovah really wants the best for them
and he’s helping and guiding them
in the way that they should go.
And the end result
—we notice there in verse 18—
is that peace and righteousness
will be their reward.
Well, this truly is something
that can help the Bible student.
In fact, when they start to face the changes
that they need to make in life
if they have this love for Jehovah,
they won’t just view it
as something they have to do
in order to attain everlasting life.
No, they’ll view these things
as opportunities for them
to prove their love of Jehovah.
Well, what has this symposium shown?
As we’ve listened to the various talks
and watched the videos,
it’s helped us to see
various ways that we can help
our Bible students to make progress.
We realize that conducting
a Bible study and helping
someone to become a disciple
is not just a matter of reading
certain paragraphs in a book
or using certain techniques;
a lot more is involved.
What else?
Well, remember that the apostle Paul
was an experienced disciple-maker.
And let’s turn our Bibles
to the first book of Thessalonians,
and we’ll notice here
that under inspiration,
the apostle Paul tells us
what else is involved.
First Thessalonians chapter 2
and we’re going to read verses 7 and 8:
“On the contrary,
we became gentle in your midst,
“as when a nursing mother
tenderly cares for her own children.
“So having tender affection for you,
“we were determined to impart to you,
not only the good news of God
“but also our very selves,
because you became so beloved to us.”
Yes, we really need to care for these ones.
We need to nurture them
(help them) with the problems
and obstacles they face along the way.
And, yes, we need to become their friends.
Well, becoming a disciple-maker
is a challenging work.
There’s a lot involved with it,
but don’t feel overwhelmed.
You can do it with Jehovah’s help
and the help of Jesus Christ.
Remember when Jesus gave us a commission
to go and make disciples,
what else did he say?
“Look!
I am with you.”
Yes, with Jehovah’s help
and with the help of Jesus,
we can experience a wonderful joy.
What is that joy?
The joy of seeing a new disciple
learn to love Jehovah.
Thank you, brothers, for helping us
to become more effective Bible teachers.
Soon we will enjoy Part I of our Bible drama
based on the account of Nehemiah.
To whet our appetite,
let us stand and sing song number 110,
entitled “The Joy of Jehovah.”
After the song, you may remain standing
for some announcements.
That’s song number 110.